Disinformation during the pandemic
Good morning everybody
As I said in the previous part, first panel
opening today´s conference Going Digital
is about disinformations, specifically disinformation
in the time of global pandemic of Covid-19
Before introducing guests and discussion,
let me say few organizational things,
Whole discussion shall be on 60 minutes
and shall be dived into 2 main parts.
In the first part there is discussion
about 3 main parts, subtopics.
Subtopics regarding disinformatio
n during Covid time.
And whats is it about? We are going to talk
about most frequent disinformations,
information narratives:
who is spreading them and why?
How it affects our society and
political environment.
And also how to defend
and is it even possible to defend that?
In the second part of discussion we are going to
take a look on viewers questions
I hereby appeal to you, the audience,
who are watching us, you can ask questions,
but please be specific of person who you are asking,
to avoid everyone answering your question.
I will also ask you to turn off your
microphones and cameras.
Before we start discussion, I would love to introduce
our panelists who are here today with us.
In the first place I want to welcome Mr. Jakub Kalensky,
who is analytist of US think tank, Atlantic Council.
Specifically he is part of program
called Digital Forensic Research Lab.
In the past he also was in EU team´s East StratCom
Task Force, which was dealing with
disinformational campaing and hybrid threats
I also welcome here Marketa Gregorova,
member of European Parliament of Pirate party,
also Vice-Chair European Pirate Party,
who deals with hybrid threats, disinformations
and cyber security in European Parliament.
Next who I welcome here is Alžběta Bajerová,
who same as Mr Kalensky, is not physically present here,
but we can see them on monitors.
Mrs Bajerova is analyst of
Association for International Affairs.
She also operates in Brusel, in NATO's HQ,
where she also works as analysist dealing with
disinformations and influential operations in Transatlantic area.
At last but not at least I welcome here
Mr. Zdeněk Strnad, chief editor of Flowee City.
Welcome here everybody
and lets move to discussion.
As I said before, at first we will discuss
the most frequent disinformations
and disinformative narratives about COVID-19
we can meet and see on Internet
and who is spreading them
and what is their motive?
At this point I would like to ask Mr. Kalensky
if he can enlighten us, with his expertise.
What narratives and disinformatins
about Covid-19 do you perceive,
who are the most common disseminators
and what is their motivation?
Thank you for invitation, the most common narratives,
why they are being spread and disserminators.
That is a thing for hour long talk.
So I will try to summarize that into 2 minutes.
The most common narratives will be heading
to who is responsible for that virus or pandemic,
is it as serious as official sources claim
and how to solve it.
So you will be questioning whole existence of the pandemic,
you will be questioning creation that in China.
Instead you will be saying that this brought US Army
who is responsible for worlwide spreading.
You will be fabricate nonsenses about organizating that
by Bill Gates to put microchips in brains via vaccination.
which we have there already from previous
pandemics, from different people.
According those desinformaters you will be spreading
lies about how to solve this pandemic.
How to cure this disease.
The whole thing has just one goal,
to undermine the West,
undermine institutions, including solid media,
governments and their institutions.
This partly answers to the questions,
who is spreading that.
The main informative aggressors are Russia and China.
They feel to be in coflict with the West.
they want to choose mostly information means,
not military means
so they use the information sphere to actually weaken the West
at all levels at which they are able to do so
And one of them may be to questioning that
you have to trust the government, WHO or your doctors
about how serious it is and how to deal with it.
Of course, then as the actors here have a strategy
and they know what they are doing,
unfortunately,
it is simply  law of information confrontation,
rolls a pile of useful idiots in our environment,
Ilona Csáková or Roman Šmucler,
but of course you would find them in every the language space,
someone who will repeat the nonsense
and they will not know that they serve as
useful idiots to some information aggressors.
So thats briefly from me and I would let speak
other speakers. We can explain details later.
Thank you, you mentioned several levels of those
disseminators, from state actors to useful idiots.
I would now like to ask Mrs Markéta Gregorová
about the motivation of these disseminators,
Mr Kalenský also mentioned China as a state actor
who is actually trying to change the overall narrative,
that China is not the source of the virus,
on the contrary, the source of the virus are other countries,
that China is successful
in fighting the virus and helps everyone.
What do you think, has China been successful?
Successful in this effort to change this narrative
and what do you actually think about their motivations?
Why is China doing it?
Thank you for the question, I'll start with
those motivations,  because I just think it's important
to mention that motivations can be different.
as we may be used to, primarily from Russia,
for example, but not only that.
It is often a matter of weakening that trust in the institutions,
of what is true and of undermining democracy
or a democratic establishment.
In reality, however, China has slightly different
reasons for its disinformation campaigns and what it does.
And that is, technical and scientific espionage
and also the ambition to be the scientific, technological
and business leader in the world.
To do this, of course,
it needs the most positive image possible,
for people to believe it, to like it.
to want to make business deals with it,
to want to sell it something or buy something.
It is not just about ideology,
but also about good old money.
That's why China's trying to get into that position of savior,
and that's how I get to your question
about if China was successful.
Of course, we do not have data from
all countries, whether global or European yet.
However, where China began its largest
disinformation campaigns in Italy,
we have data and China was succesful.
Chinese so-called Mask diplomacy,
as it is now called, has caused it.
China actually supplied protective equipment
and similar things to Italy for free
and spread information there about how China is helping
and how the virus doesn't come from there at all.
It caused that before the Mask diplomacy
about 10% of Italians had somehow
a positive attitude or opinion of China,
now it's 52% this is an extreme increase
and at the same time
we have evidence of how much it was disinformations.
On Twitter, for example, it was very interesting
to watch which hashtags were followed.
Hashtags #GsoChinaandItaly and #forzaCinaeItalia,
over 46% of posts were created by automatic bots and not real people.
even so, it had such a big impact
about a 42% increase in chinese popularity.
We can say that at least
somewhere China was successful.
China knows how to use propaganda
and misinformation,
unfortunately because it has had many years of testing at home,
so we need to focus more on it and learn to fight it.
Alžběta Bajerová,
you also work as an analyst at NATO in Brussel
and also as an analyst,
the Association for International Affairs
from what Markéta Gregorová talked about,
could it be deduced that the spread of disinformation
and disinformation narratives by a power such as China
poses a certain security threat,
and within the geopolitics of the transatlantic region.
Do you perceive that threat?
Are they successful in threatening in Transaltantic region
by spreading disinformations and disinformational narratives?
Thank you  for the question and for the invitation.
Certainly, information operations by state actors
pose a threat to transatlantic security.
And I think we saw it best right now
with the covid-19 pandemic.
At the same time, an infodemia arose
that prevented to states from making an effective
response to what was happening.
We must say that those crises, such as the pandemic,
are a breeding ground for all disinformation
when people's attention to covid news
was extremely high,
and especially in the first wave,
the demand for information exceeded the supply
that official sources could provide.
So people often turned to alternative sources.
This is something we will probably
see with each subsequent crisis.
The actors of those information operations
took advantage of this and did not produce
a large number of disinformation articles,
but all that disinformation infrastructure
was straining to cover just covid- 19.
And these actors used covid as a carrier
of what Mr Kalenský and Mrs Gregorová
have already mentioned here.
So that they can deliver this traditional
light motive of all information operations.
That the institutions, the media
and our democracy cannot be trusted.
But it must be said
that the responsibility for that infodemic,
massive spread of disinformation,
among the masses and into the mainstream,
we can't just blame those information operations.
The biggest spreads
of disinformation during the covid period,
as now confirmed by independent research
from Harvard, Oxford and Kings College,
were domestic politicians and the mainstream media.
Politicians in the pandemic often relied on disinformation
when they were in line with their political views.
And after the mainstream media had to communicate
what they were saying so they spread the disinformation.
And here I want to follow up on what Mrs Gregorova
said about the spread of misinformation in Italy.
Where researchers from Merck said
that the botnets on Twiter did not have
the greatest influence on the Italian public
but the politicians themselves,
who promoted the disinformation flowing from China,
because they joined China in the Belt
and Trails initiative last year,
so they've been helping a lot now,
that China is sending some aid
and they have inflated how China is helping.
At the same time, the media had to inform
about what politicians are saying.
At the same time, it focused a little on aid
from China and Russia, it was exotic
and it was a bigger topic than aid coming from the EU.
To the statistics quoted here,
I would just add that, at the same time,
70% of Italians feel that the EU has failed
to help Italy and respond to the corona virus.
Which is an even more important number.
So to sum it up, the most dangerous
is the convergence between
the disinformation infrastructure
and the mainstream, politicians or the media.
Here I would turn to Zdeněk Strnad
as a long-time journalist and now chief editor,
Mr Strnad, do you feel to some extent responsible
for refuting disinformation as a journalist in the relevant medium?
In your opinion,
should the traditional mainstream media
refute the disinformation, or is it someone else's job?
And another thing you wrote,
among other things, if I remember correctly
an article mentioning that disinformations
and fake new news are nuclear weapons of the 21st century.
Can you explain what did you mean?
First to the second question
the article I wrote
in which it was written that disinformation
is the nuclear weapons of the 21st century
is based on a simple premise
The purpose of  every war
or conquest of a territory
is actually to obtain resources
which are in that territory.
whether they are natural resources,
people, whatever
If you fight for a territory
by traditional methods,
the ground war or so,
then there is some damage in that territory.
There is  damaged infrastructure
or casualties and so on.
but when using disinformation as such,
So if you are doing it very intelligently
and given the budgets of those states
we are talking about,
devoted to spreading disinformations
and  colleague mentioned here,
for example, the influence of China,
here in the Czech Republic,
So given how much money goes
into those disinformation campaigns
and how, as has already been said here,
with those subjects
that are now beginning to
spread disinformation and financing it,
trying to gain influence as in that territory,
so it is quite obvious that when you use that disinformations
so the influence and access to resources you can get
without damaging things you dont want to damage.
and now I would like to ask on the first question,
how exactly was it?
Because other speakers mentioned
that the medias are to some extent
responsible for refuting the misinformation.
It is very difficult especially
when we take into account the situation
that arose from the beginning of the year
due to the covid pandemic.
There was a huge social isolation of some groups,
and I was working a lot with seniorsat the time.
There the problem was absolutely the most striking.
Dozens of chain mails circulate in these closed groups,
in which the information
spreads completely uncontrollably
unlike social networks, which are used
by other groups of the population,
but there is actually almost no public control.
and it is important to realize for what purpouse
or which are credible sources of informations.
Each of those groups has some sources,
this has chain emails.
Some simply follow certain websites,
certain groups on social networks and so on.
and the information circulates in these closed
groups or in those channels and circles.
However, there is one channel that everyone,
no matter how his credibility is questioned,
it still has enormous credibility in the eyes of the public,
of all the public, of all age groups,,
and these are the public medias.
which, as I said, despite all the criticism,
still have enormous credibility,
so I think that their role in today's world
and the current information situation
and completely irreplaceable.
I personally I think their importance
is also the reason why such a war is waged against them.
The very last thing I get is
to what you asked first.
if I feel responsible for it as chief editor.
Of course, I feel responsible within our readers and
I think that this is the task not only
of the chief editors of the local medias,
and people who work there
but actually all people who simply
work in public space in any way.
or even among your friends,
among the family actually
everyone should be responsible for that within
those people who can simply influences.
Due to the fact that
I am the chief editor of a magazine
that reads a number of people,
so I definitely feel the responsibility
I feel a responsibility
for this within us and honestly
I'm a little ashamed when it is taken
as  journalism, or journalist to journalism as whole
because what some colleagues produce
it is sometimes hair-raising.
And the last thing I think there is a completely
significant and huge influence of the family.
Because children who are, let's say,
far more sensitive to those fake news
or let's say children and teenagers
just as we say young people.
At least from my point of view,
as well as adults who perceive some media as authorities,
in my case the public medias, so I think
that those teenagers and children
there is influence of a family,
which up to a certain age
considers a completely irreplaceable authority.
Probably thats all for the beginning, thank you.
So I will follow up and address Jakub Kalenský,
Mr. Kalenský, you talked about influential
operations and disinformations
and their impact on society in the US Congress,
and you are trying to make
the Euro-Atlantic area a better response to
disinformation and its impact on our society.
The question is simple.
How do you think society, politicians or media
should fight againts disinformations?
What is the way to fight them?
First of all, it is necessary to accept
that it will be a more options
and not that it will simply be the right option.
Sometimes you hear different people
in that information space
saying that one thing will solve everything.
Either we would have to accept
that this one solution is simply not enough
or we would aim for a higher level of media literacy
than is still available to humanity in 2020
It seems to me more rational the first possibility
that we need a larger range of those solutions,
not just one solution.
And that we finally need to do more
and think less about if we are doing something
One thing we really should learn
from those Russians and Chinese
they're not afraid to make mistakes.
They are just acting
and are not afraid to use a relatively primitive
but centuries-tested method of trial and error.
They are just trying to spread the information.
The channels and the messages
that work for them are repeated,
nd if something doesn't work for them,
they look away from it.
On the contrary, since 2015, the European Union
has produced 70 different documents
on the topic of how to deal with disinformations
Basically, we're still looking for the perfect
solution instead of finally doing something.
There are only a few individuals
from the European institutions,
who works every day instead of thinking
about what would be good to do
I don't know what it's entirely that maybe
it's because those information Aggressors
have a little more such morality
or adaptive thinking
towards conflict situation while we'd still
like to pretend that there is no conflict
and that we can talk from it.
The moment we turn these two fundamental obstacles
that prevent us from reacting to it effectively,
or reconciling with the fact that different
audiences need different solutions
and reconciling with
the need to do more, talk less
and that we have to come to terms with it.
that  we will make mistakes.
So then we have great opportunities
to do everything
I have been trying for some time to talk about
such four basic lines of defense against disinformation.
The first one is completely primitive
We  need to more document,
our big problem is that
we still don't have a complete picture.
We still do not know
how many disinformations information aggressors
are spreading every day and how successful they are.
The honorable Member has spoken
about the opinion poll in Italy.
We would need opinion polls
that measure the success of disinformation
every quarter of the year for all 27 Member States
or ideal for the whole of Europe.
But if you asked me, who spends
60 to 80 hours a week with this problem,
how many people in the Czech Republic
believe that Skripal poisoned himself
or that MH17 was shot down by Ukrainians,
I won't tell you. I dont know.
And that's the problem that we don't even
know  the exact extent of the problem,
but then we are badly creating solutions.
The 2nd line of defense is raising
awareness of what the threat is.
Mr. Strnad talked about the fact that
medias can inform more  and I think they can
I'm  glad that some media
do it in the Czech Republic,
I think maybe Denik N, RespeKt or Aktuálně,
they quite try to do it on a regular basis
which is great.
I have even noticed the Eurozpravy
that it is trying.
That's great and I'm glad that some media do,
but on the other side,
it would certainly be possible to do it more.
We can't think that only media will solve this.
I'll talk about what Mr. Strand said,
we just have the problem,
again, disinformators know it,
Different audiences
receive information differently.
We have to count with the fact
that some Mr. Balda
somewhere near Bruntál
simply will not consume Aktuálně or Respekt.
We have to find the channel
that speaks to him,
and again these disinformers can do much better
than we can. Just by trial and error.
They don't really hesitate to open offices
in all the Scandinavian countries
and close them in a month
because it doesn't work.
Because Finns do not need to read in bad Finnish written
what is happening in Ukraine.
So they are trying some different channels.
The third line of defense and
the correction of our weaknesses, such as media literacy,
and it is related to those social networks
I don't consider them to be bad guys, on the other hand,
they could do a lot more so
that the disinformations don't spread there.
The fact that YouTube is able to recommend
to viewers in recommended videos Russia Today,
it's just as if Tesco offered you heroin
at the cash register.
I just dont get it, how is this possible.
And the 4th line of defense and
that's something we do very little,
And it's a thing where I'm slightly happy
that it was written into the European democracy action plan.
We must punish those information aggressors,
and we can't just tell the victims of information
aggression, prepare better next time.
We don't deal with crimes like this,
we don't tell Breivik victims, you should have run faster
and you should have bought better armor.
No, we're trying to arrest that Breivik
so he doesn't shoot people anymore.
But since 2015, we have done nothing
at all to nor Russia nor China,
and for their information operations
to bear some unwanted costs.
Until we change the mindset here,
they will continue.
And as long as they continue to do so,
they will have results, so the 4th line,
I would probably say
that it will be the most important there.
If we don't do it then all three of the previous lines
may just be wasted.
I thank you, Let me just specify
that just yesterday
the European Commission issued
the so-called Democracy action plan
and there is proposition as one of the possible
solutions to combat disinformation
the possibility of imposing sanctions on subjects
who purposefully and systematically
spread such disinformation
so it is such a new thing that may be
transformed into a legislative act
We are slowly approaching
to the middle of the panel.
I just want to appeal to the audience,
if you want, in the chat you can ask
any question to our speakers,
and then we will be nearing
the end of this panel,
your questions will be answered, so dont be afraid
to ask questions in the chat.
I would like to ask Marketa Gregorová,
Mr Kalenský talked
about the influence of disinformation.
I will specifically
ask about political influence,
because you are a Member of the European Parliament
sitting in the Legislature of the European Union,
how do you actually feel that political influence
there through disinformation campaigns?
Whether its the views of your colleagues
from other factions or the amendments they put forward,
how do they feel about the various
legislative proposals of the commission
do you feel the influence
and results of disinformations?
So I will,
although I am here in the European Parliament
to start a little bit from the Czech level,
because I think that we
and everyone here actually see the influence
and even more the political one,
because we have witnessed demonstrations  in Prague.
Here we have seen how you can start
a wave of solidarity at the beginning of a pandemic
when everyone sews maks
and is encouraging others to handle it,
and when the 2nd wave came,
of course, not only through disinformation
and government´s behavior,
but also due to disinformations regarding the
effectiveness of those protective equipment
or the danger of the virus,
and suddenly solidarity
and sewing maks becomes resistance.
Not believing to the government
or other experts saying.
and of course the political impact
of the demonstrations.
Which now may seemed like only
a part of society feels it that way,
in my opinion, this will be reflected especially
in the elections next year, to the parliament,
and true impact comes out.
The European level is something
little different because what the EU
can do and has autority during through pandemic,
was mainly some cross-border cooperation
and coordination of the transport of
protective equipment or other materials.
Then, of course, financial aid
and there I must say that from the beginning
there was a relatively large solidarity
and a relatively large effort to obtain
as many funds as possible
for those funds of economic recovery
but also for the purchase of protective equipment
to countries where second wave hits harder.
And after all, we as the Czech Republic also felt it,
when, I think lung ventilators,
we were provided with this fund.
So I would say that I did not see the political effects
so much that the solidarity persisted there,
but I think that each individual member state,
not just the Czech Republic,
felt the political effects individually.
And it can also have very long-term
and long-lasting consequences
and the way how our democracy will remain strong.
Thank you, now I would like to
turn to Alžběta Bajerová.
Regarding disinformation during a pandemic,
which is the main topic of this panel
that are definitely related health risks
because if we spread disinformation
and narratives such as covid doesnt exist,
don´t wear masks and so on.
It ceirtanly has health effects
and health risks can also be life threatening
You, as an analyst for
the Public Affairs Association and NATO
do you see these health risks,
and is there really any evidence
that disinformation does have an impact
in this area of health and
affects human lives and human health?
Thanks for the question
complex data and some clear statistics
and does not yet exist,
but I think we can see the primary
and secondary health effects.
The direct effects are, for example,
when 700 Iranians died of methanol poisoning,
after trying to distill the alcohol
that was said to be able to cure covid.
It is an example of some
disinformation about treatment,
sounding seemingly innocent,
can result in the deaths of 700 people.
Another direct effect will certainly be
the disinformation regarding vaccinations for covid,
which is already growing.
I think that the moment vaccinations start,
we will definitely see
a second wave of disinformation,
when people will unnecessarily die
because they refuse to be vaccinated.
Secondary effects then are
when people do not follow the measures
because they do not believe in covid,
and this causes next spreading.
Which then has the cumulative effect
when hospitals are full and so on.
The direct effect of disinformations
can be extremely harmful,
we can also see it outside healthcare.
For example in the USA an armed man
broke into a restaurant in 2017,
because he firmly believed that the Clinton family
kept there and abused small children.
In the UK, dozens of 5G towers
have been destroyed by people,
who believed the 5G is harmful.
According to the survey,
only a small percentage of people in the UK
trust alternative media, compared to the US.
But this small percentage is enough
for the effect of disinformation
to be really harmful.
The potential threat to
those information operations
is, that those groups of people who are so
deeply convinced of this disinformation
can be weaponized from a distance.
Weaponize by targeted disinformations.
for example, for destroying
the critical information infrastructure,
and something like this could be used,
for example, in conflict.
Now I would like to ask Zdeněk Strnad
and I will actually follow up on Mrs Bajerová
regarding the issue of creating
some social bubbles,
either on social networks
or on the Internet as such.
When, for example
we have a social bubble of refusers of vaccination
and they simply do not leave the bubble because
they confirm each other in their truth and
dont want to hear other alternative opinions
or are not inclined not to listen to them.
Last year, you took part
in the successful Day Offline campaign,
which, by the way,
also drew attention to the consequences
of addiction to the Internet and social networks.
Why I am saying it, do you think
that our dependence on social networks
is actually one of the consequences of
an addiction and creating of social bubbles
that are just impermeable?
And do you think
that if we disconnect us more from the Internet
would the bubbles start to burst a little
or do you have a different opinion?
You are saying "disconnecting from the Internet",
so to me, frankly,  it's like a situation
that I don't even consider,
because disconnecting
from the Internet is something, in my opinion,
like inventing Time Machine.
The campaing Day Offline,
you were talking about was not just about
disconnecting people completely, but first
tried to balance
their approach to social networks.
in order not to live only in the closure
in those one bubbles,
on the contrary,
to get out of those bubbles, they drew information
also from other sources
because returning to those social bubbles,
is basically certain regardless
of those social bubbles
arise arise on the internet
or whether they arise simply in real life
because before the influence of the internet,
when noone was Facebook or elsewhere,
was going to work, to pub and had family.
Those were three social bubbles at that time.
But how to get out of this,
I would like to mention one more campaing.
In this year's coronavirus period,
we actually started a show, on one
regional television, called Prague for Seniors.
one of the goals was to spread information
among one of the most endangered groups,
which in this case were seniors.
Who, as I say, do not believe
what is in the official media,
chain emails with  an incredible amount of
disinformation are shared among them,
There is no control in that.
How you convince any social group
that you want to tell them something?
And they should give some importance on it.
Well, you have to interpret it in a way
that they believe,
and because one of the biggest
arguments that speaks
for the truth of certain information
is when someone you trust tells you.
So we were thinking about
who these people would trust,
who is the one, who enters their bubble
and at the same time is important for them.
So after a long deliberation
we chose a moderator named Saša Hemala,
Everyone from this group knows him.
He was announcing news and informations
about what it looks in Prague
with current supplies.
It was a show that ran three times a week,
had a relatively high audience.
And when Mr Kalenský spoke about
how this should be reflected in the media.
This is one of the ways in which the media,
regardless of their size and reach,
could fight it.
Think about the need and specifics of people,
who you are talking to,
think who is the person
who will speak to them through your medium.
learn to speak their language,
thats's incredibly important.
then you have some chance
that you will somehow slow down
the crazy flow of disinformation.
if not stop it.
It's hard job, there is no universal recipe for it,
just the personal responsibility of everyone,
whether it's a parent,
or it's a person who has the opportunity to
influence the content of a media,
or whether it's an ordinary citizen.
I think the principle is the same
maybe just like that the degree
of responsibility is various,
depending on how many people you influence.
Jakub Kalensky, you mentioned
both the Democracy Action Plan
but also the responsibility
and a certain role of online platforms
specifically mentioned by YouTube.
Do you think that the Commission is trying,
in the Action Plan for Democracy,
to ensure that, in the future,
online platforms would be more regulated?
and they have more responsibility
for fight againts disinformation?
Do you think that this is the right way
that there should be EU regulation
that would bind online platforms like
Facebook, Twitter or Tik Tok and so on.
to really be looking for
disinformations and deleting it?
Isnt it close to censorship?
Who will decide what is true and what is not?
I admit that I probably don't have a completely
strong opinion on regulation or non-regulation.
It's not like I want to avoid an answer.
It's not that I'm not knowing the topic,
but I'm actually still not sure if it's a good idea
or if it's not a good idea.
It is clear that the so-called
self-regulatory principle,
which the European Commission
chose sometime in 2016/2017,
turns out to be almost useless.
In its own documents,
the commission always admits that,
the platforms have shown us activities
that actually do nothing about
the spreading of disinformation
and always, as every month,
Commission threatens them,
if you don't get better next time
so we have to think about regulation.
Thats being said over two years.
Which seems to me to be that the level
of solving the problem is not entirely high,
but I'm not really sure.
Maybe we should think about that a little
in the style we think of the medias
I think how often is there a debate about
whether social networks are actually publishers,
they are publishing information or not.
I think, gradually shows that, yes, they are.
I think, for example,
the recent US election showed it a bit.
while until then, Facebook
and Twitter always washed their hands
and were saying we don't really interfere
with what is spreading in our networks
and we only deal with such
coordinated inauthentic behavior.
so suddenly as soon as
they indicated that Donald Trump
was lying about winning the election
or lying about those falsifications,
so they showed us, that they care nor just
about unauthentic behavior, but also about the factual level
Which I quite like,
they came up with it themselves
without any regulation,
but at the same time
I admit that it's not certain,
that the networks will do it for us.
That "who will decide",
I will admit that the question,
although I have been listening
it for several years,
I don't really like it.
It suddenly makes from the truth
some personal property,
and I am deeply convinced
that there is no personal property in the truth.
Old scholastic definition
speaks of adaequatio rei et intellectus
as a harmony of what you have
in your head with what is outside.
Thats a process of searching.
You are searching if
whats is happening between your ears
matches what's going on outside the brain.
I think that everyone
here simply has to be an arbitrator,
which should not mean,
That the networks or platforms or any other
actor will not have the responsibility.
After all, the platforms can also decide,
that they have some responsibility,
and in that case of Donald Trump,
they obviously said it to themselves
and they decided.
this is just something we're going to refute,
and I'd even like to see them do this more often.
I think that here each of us
will have the responsibility,
whether it's at the level of the individual
or at the level of a huge company like Facebook.
I don't mind at all
that if they take it on their own.
Of course I will be happy if they do it
in cooperation with renowned fact checkers
and non-profits who have been
doing on this for years
and its plenty of them.
if they have the will it will not
be difficult to implement,
but I don't think we just have to look for
someone outside who defines it for us
instead of us so we can wash our hands
and say we don't really decide
what's true or not.
We should accept the responsibility
I think it's up to each individual, every medium
to decide where the boundaries are.
We can push them to have those boundaries
where we think it is right.
For example,
as for the pandemic of the corona virus,
Facebook went the way of self-regulation
and maybe changed its algorithms
and prefers messages
that are currently issued to authorities
such as the WHO. Ministry of Health and so on.
This may be one way to go.
I would say that in this was
Facebook or Twitter quite successful.
Markéta Gregorová regarding
the Commission's future legislative proposals
on fight againts disinformation,
you will co-decide about them
in the European Parliament.
What is your point of view,
should online platforms be legally responsible
and regulated in the sense
that they should actually search for
and delete disinformation content?
Or the Union and the Member States
should go the way,
as Mr Kalenský said, of analyses,
data collection and gaining more information
about how those narratives work
and how they are spread.
For example, the European Union has
recently started operating in
so-called European Digital Media Observatory (ATMO).
which is about to work with both
academics and fact checkers
on the analysis of disinformation.
What is the right way?
Well, as Mr. Kalenský has already said,
This is a million dollar question,
but of course I must also agree with him,
as he said at the beginning,
that we must stop standing still
and start doing something
Often people are asking me,
if we are losing the fight against disinformation
and I am always replying
that we haven't started fighting yet.
We have no legislation.
We don't have any proper tools
or anything that would really push it forward.
Anyway, to what is the best answer,
it probably won't surprise anyone
that I'm not completely enthusiastic
about some self-regulation of networks,
but that's because it's not a question.
Should that be regulated?
There will be regulation.
It's about who will be responsible for it and
who will be the leader of it.
We are currently throwing
that responsibility on social networks
ecause we have a legal vacuum
in this regard and no one knows.
But even the networks themselves
do not want to have that responsibility.
In my opinion people think, for example,
that Google and Facebook come to me lobbying
asking to not change anything.
No they are lobbying
that they desperately want some regulation,
because they are terribly unhappy about it.
They are companies
that are based on earning profit,
and that is their main goal, why do they exist.
It's not because they really wanted
to make society better
or more connected
but because they make profits from it.
Well, we can't really expect social
responsibility from such companies,
but the fact that they will try
to behave in such a way
that they have more and more satisfied users,
who will bring them further profits,
whether from advertising or anything else,
and that is why we should not let
them regulate themselves,
because what will happen, is that they will
only censor more and more
and deal more and more what
correct content they have there
in order to have those satisfied users there,
on the contrary,
I think that governments should emancipate
I prefer to be EU on our continent
and, of course, governments
and finally dive into it.
Now I'm talking about the short-term approach.
There is of course long-term one
with lots of steps, media literacy or so,
that I take as granted
but at the same time
and that's my last point in this.
It's not that the government should
determine some dreaded Ministry of Truth
and regulate platforms.
It's about the balance of who he is doing what
and I think we forget that balance
is quite beneficial in the triangle.
We forget about civil society,
the truly independent organizations
and people who can control and support it.
At the moment it is set up so
that there are some organizations
which are being hired by the platforms.
We can trust them or we don't,
but it is just about trust.
But if is there balanced triangle
and it will be supported by governments,
and respected by democratic controls,
that it is independent
and the platforms will be encouraged
to hire these agencies
and they will  do fact-checking
or checking the information
and mark and show,
not necessarily censored.
Just to show, that information is not true.
So I think we can get to a point
that is neither the censorship
but also not doing noything,
because both are, in my opinion,
very harmful and we must go in some direction.
Thank you, since we still have 10 minutes left,
I would quickly turn to the questions
that landed in the chat,
There is question which aims at Jakub Kalenský
from Mr. Dominik Voráč
"In your opinion, disinformators are winning
because we are only thinking
while disinformators are acting.
but isn´t it also about that,
that defending against disinformation
is much harder and more difficult
than creating and spreading disinformation?"
Thanks for the question,
because I thought we wouldn't
get to that question,
so I was answering it in the chat.
So I will briefly answer here.
I completely agree with the premise
that spreading disinformation is easier
than defending against them.
I think that's exactly what
we should adapt to in a situation.
After all, we profess the same
principles in the physical space
as opposed to the information space.
If it is easier to rob people
than to defend against someone stealing us,
so we simply set laws
and restrictions so that it is more difficult.
If it is easier to spread a toxic substance
than to make sure that none of the
inhabitants spreads any toxic substances,
we simply set up such mechanisms
so that it is more complicated.
Yes, it is of course easier
and it is up to us to solve this situation.
Surely there was a time
when there were no traffic regulations,
people probably died because of it.
Then someone said
that there are too many cars
so we should have some regulations
for how we will move on those roads.
Maybe we are really approaching the time
when maybe those regulations will really be necessary.
That information space has evolved to a time
when it is already quite complicated.
It's not as easy as it used to be.
Governments and the big media no longer
have a monopol on the information situation.
We have new subjects here
who don't really have the mechanisms
as media or goverment have.
We probably must adapt to the situation
and we have to reckon with the fact
that there are bad participants
or aggressors to whom
we simply must make it difficult
and not lettim them spreading
disinformation with impunity.
We have three minutes
so I would ask Alžběta Bajerová,
she was a member of the analytical
project ChinfluenCE
within the Association for International Affairs,
which is of course dealing
with the influence of China.
and thus I will follow up on Markéta,
who spoke about the fact that
China is successful in building that narrative.
What do you think,
is China and its hybrid threats
and disinformations, threat for 21st century?
Certainly, those state-sponsored
information operatitions,
these which are linked to China,
they have most resources.
At the same time, the information
operations coming to Transatlantic area
are not high quality.
Mainly because language barrier
and there is also a cultural barrier.
The narrative that is now spreading
and is very positive about China
is quite recognizable to us,
as Europeans, as propaganda.
so I must say that so far
the direct effectiveness is not so high,
rather the risk that currently
represents Chinese operations lies
in connecting those elites on messaging of China.
However, in the future, it can be assumed
because of those massive resources,
that the quality of operations
resulting from East Asia will increase.
So I would certainly call it a threat.
Unfortunately, our time has passed,
So I want to thank you for your participation
and thank you for being here with us,
even though you couldn't be here
with us physically but at least online.